---
layout: post
title: "Review of Because You Died: Poetry and Prose of the First World War and After, by Vera Brittain"
date: 2019-05-17
---
My interest in Vera Brittain was renewed by a chance viewing one night of the film adaptation of her memoirs, Testament of Youth, in which she recounted her experiences of the First World War and how it shaped her journey towards Pacifism. I had first discovered Vera Brittain during my sophomore year history tutorial in the College of Social Studies at Wesleyan University. I had read some excerpts of her writings in a collection of primary sources about women's voices from and experiences of the First World War. Even while I was in college, I was already struck by the power of her writing to convey the devastating impacts of war. After watching Testament of Youth, I decided to explore Vera Brittain's writings in more depth through the book Because You Died: Poetry and Prose of the First World War and After.

As the title suggests, Because You Died, is a collection of poetry and prose written by Vera Brittain during the First World War and after. Some of these writings were previously unpublished. The collection was edited and introduced by Mark Bostridge, and published in November 2008, in time for the commemorations of the 90th anniversary of the Armistice that brought silence to the guns on the Western Front. Mark Bostridge, a British writer and biographer, provides some background to Vera Brittain's life, which can be helpful to readers unfamiliar with her story. He also provides some historical context to the writings included in the collection, which reflect Vera Brittain's own journey from student at Oxford to nurse in the First World War and finally to a pacifist in the inter-war years.

The poems date primarily from the First World War Years, 1914 - 1918, while the prose excerpts date primarily from after the First World War. There is a noticeable difference in tone between the poetry and prose writings. Vera Brittain's war poems are very emotionally raw, and they convey viscerally her experience of the First World War, and the devastating losses she suffered. When the war started, she was student at Oxford reading English literature despite her father's initial objections. By the war's end, she had lost her fiancé, two close friends, and perhaps most devastating of all, her beloved younger brother who was killed on the Italian Front in 1918 mere months before the cessation of hostilities. Vera's grief and pain come across very strongly in her poems, although their rawness may not appeal to all. Some readers may also find her poetry lacks sophistication or lyricism. Criticism of her poetry should however be tempered by the fact that she was merely 21 when the war started and still a student, and the losses she suffered would have been devastating to any human being. Writing seems to have been a salve for some of her grief and pain, although likely a poor consolation in comparison to the depths of loss that she experienced. 

The prose excerpts meanwhile reflect an increased maturity on the part of Vera Brittain. Age and experience of war led her to choose a path of pacifism. Her pacifist ideas and critiques of the revival of militarism in the interwar years come across in her prose writings. Two particular prose excerpts struck me. One was Vera's recounting of how she and her friend revisited the First World War battlefields to remember and commemorate her experiences and the men she loved and lost in the the war. Her descriptions of the intersections of the topographies of personal and mass death, conflict, loss, memory, and commemoration were particularly poignant. Monuments in the former battlefields and the war cemeteries testify to national memory but Vera Brittain showed how all memory is perhaps fundamentally personal. It is individuals who grieve, mourn, and remember those who died for the nation, that ideal, or composite of individuals. 

Another striking prose excerpt for me was Vera Brittain's short story about a soldier who survives and returns home from the war, but his life is still shattered anyway. The soldier is inspired by Vera's beloved younger brother. The story suggests that even if he had survived the First World War, he would have returned a broken man, his life and world irrecovably shattered by the war. The story conveys Vera's mature adult view of the sheer destructiveness of war and how war's devastating consequences far outlast the duration of the conflict. 

Overall, I enjoyed the book, although I found some of the poems very challenging to read because of how emotionally raw they were. I would recommend the book to anyone interested in personal experiences and memories of The First World War, women's experience of war, and the intersections of history, memory, and literature.
