---
layout: post
title: "Review of The Remains of the Day by Kazuo Ishiguro"
categories: blog
date: 2019-05-17
---
I had wanted to discover Kazuo Ishiguro's writings ever since he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2017. I was intrigued by the Nobel committee's prize citation of Ishiguro "who, in novels of great emotional force, has uncovered the abyss beneath our illusory sense of connection with the world." I decided to start with The Remains of the Day as it had won the Man Booker Prize in 1989 and the book was subsequently adapted into a critically acclaimed movie in 1993. 

The Remains of the Day tells the story of Stevens, the long serving butler of Darlington Hall, who in the summer of 1956, sets off on a journey through the English countryside. The trip becomes a journey into Steven's past, and England's recent past. The story is told from the point of view of Stevens, and readers are privy to his thoughts, perspectives, and memories. The narrative is non-linear as the story flashes back and forth between the present and the past, particularly to episodes at Darlington Hall during the years between the two World Wars. It is a tale of decline on several levels, personal, professional, societal, of unfulfilled and unrealised love, of duty and service, and of how the road to hell can sometimes be paved with good intentions. 

As I was a historian by academic background, I was most interested in the novel's depiction of the malleability and fallibility of human and historical memory. As Stevens recounts his past, and the past of Lord Darlington whom he had served, it becomes increasingly clear to the reader that the old butler has embellished or censored his memories, especially with regards to what in hindsight are shameful historical truths. The novel also interrogates the fascination with fascism among segments of the English aristocracy during the interwar years, and questions their interactions with members of the rising Nazi party in Germany, ties which in retrospect would prove to be remarkably ill judged even if they had initially been motivated by good intentions. The novel also question's the individual's responsibility in events of great historical nature. Stevens justifies himself as being nothing more than a butler, but as he himself recalls his loyal service facilitated important meetings between his master and Nazi officials. 

The novel also examines man's confrontation with existential dread. One of the most striking passages from the book is the following, when Stevens asks himself (and the reader), “What can we ever gain in forever looking back and blaming ourselves if our lives have not turned out quite as we might have wished? The hard reality is, surely, that for the likes of you and I, there is little choice other than to leave our fate, ultimately, in the hands of those great gentlemen at the hub of this world who employ our services. What is the point in worrying oneself too much about what one could or could not have done to control the course one’s life took? Surely it is enough that the likes of you and I at least try to make our small contribution count for something true and worthy. And if some of us are prepared to sacrifice much in life in order to pursue such aspirations, surely that is in itself, whatever the outcome, cause for pride and contentment.”

The novel has great emotional heft, but it conveys its force and moves the reader subtly. The tone of the writing is that which a real English butler would have used, genteel, discrete, with a dash of pride, thereby demonstrating Kazuo Ishiguro's masterful command of the English language. I would recommend this novel. I am also now interested to watch the film adaptation and to compare and contrast how it differs from the book and to see how Stevens' recollections are portrayed on film. 
